
Ryle's Misuse of "Category Mistake"

The errors of Ryle's The Concept of Mind can be divided into three sorts:

1. Logical errors, in particular his theory of category mistakes.

2. Linguistic errors, a priori statements about language contradicted by fact.

3. Frequently begging the question by assuming behaviourist premises in his anti-dualist arguments.

Given a sentence S and an expression in that sentence we can replace that expression by a variable X to form a "predicate" P which may then possibly be applied to other expressions by substitution. In this context the various values for X will be called "terms".

The problem is: is there a criteria or definition involving predicates that allows us to decide whether two terms A and B belong to the same category ? If we naively consider natural language in its full extent then there is clearly no simple one, for we can always find predicates common to A and B and predicates which apply to both A and B at once and predicates which apply to one of these terms and not to the other.

What is wrong with Aristotle's, Leibniz's or Kant's categories ? And the division into genus and species ?




What is a set ?

A set is a tree. To specify a set we can list all the elements that belong to it and then all the elements that belong to each one of these elements and so forth. In Cohen's forcing technique there is the notion of P
P -name, where P is some set endowed with a preorder. A P -name is simply a set viewed as a tree but with each node labelled with an element of P.  An ordinary set  can be seen as a P-name with its tree's nodes tagged with the top element 1
of P. Given a P-name y and a subset G⊆P we can obtain a normal set by going through the tree and prunning off nodes whose labels do not belong to G and then forgetting the labels and considering the resulting set - this is the interpretation or evaluation map. A particular case is in which P 
is the set of all Borelian sets of the real interval I. A P -name in then a probabilistically described set.




Are all things number ?

When we investigate the concept of computability we necessarily require arithmetic. When we investigate arithmetic from a logical point of view it is inevitable that we consider computability or are lead to it. Arithmetic and computability are inseparable notions and it is likely that the Turing-Church thesis is tied to the categoricity of the theory of natural numbers N.
When one defines a natural number object in a topos the universal property gives us automatically the notion of a primitive recursive function !
The fundamental concept in recursion theory is that of partial recursive function, which can be embodied or implemented in a variety of abstract machine models such as Turing machines.  Partial recursive functions, which are partial functions (partial because the computation need not stop) from natural numbers to natural numbers can themselves be codified by natural numbers.  This allows us to have a concept of construtive functional, extending the notion of recursivity to all finite types over the natural numbers.  There are several possible constructions such as HRO, HEO.  This entire process can be generalised to the algebraic setting of partial combinatoric algebras. 
Intuitionistic arithmetic in all finite types HAω,  the terms of which form Gödel's system T,  is an alternative to set theory, category theory and type theory (HOL) for doing mathematics.  It has a model in ZFC given by interpreting a given finite type by using set-theoretic maps and the natural numbers. This model is extremely complex (it can represent the real numbers) and very little can be said about it in general. What is amazing is that models of HAω 
like HRO and HEO pack this entire structure into the microcosm of N !
This gives us a vision of the mathematical universe in which, as for the ancient Pythagoreans, all things are number.




Causal relations and counterfactuals

We give a brief account of certain ideas in Jerry Fodor and Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini's important book What Darwin Got Wrong. 
Certain things arise necessarily via constraint in the context of other things.  Suppose that whenever A is causally producted that B is causally produced as well. This is equivalent to the counterfactual:  if B is not produced, then neither is A. Then there is no way to delineate a kind of causal relationship between a C and A which does not hold between C and B,  for the actual world cannot enter into a causal relationship with a merely possible world.  In Skinner-type learning theory, where there is an association between a stimulus and a response, the question arises concerning which aspects of the stimulus are essential and which are merely a correlation. The only way to answer this is to perform a new experiment which "splits the stimulus".  
We can apply these considerations to question the causal validity of the concepts of  "adaptation" and "natural selection" (selection-for), since coextensive phenotypes likewise cannot be distinguished. Thus we cannot demarcate, without appealing to counterfactuals, the two proposals for the function of the heart: pumping blood or making a pumping sound.  




The ambiguous use of "use"

How is "use" used by certain philosophers ? Taking a look at texts such as those of Ryle and Wittgenstein we find the following. "Use" is used:

Sometimes as meaning a kind of "knack" or "know-how" (Ryle,  Concept of Mind).

Sometimes as meaning function and purpose (Ryle's "Job-analysis").

Sometimes as meaning the customary use of words,  their usage (Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 24).

Also Ayer, in Meaning, Truth and Language,  puts forward that the philosopher's job is to be concerned with "definitions-in-use"  and the transformation of sentences involving a definition into equivalent sentences.  But he contradicts himself when discussing the sense of "meaning". The "proper" sense must be the sense in which this word is habitually used in scientific and common-sense statements, which is clearly an empirical hypothesis.   




Can you accuse someone of abolishing a category ?

Categories are terms which encompass a given kind of discourse,  kinds of talk which are indispensable for the workings of language.  But how do we identify a term as categorical, how do we know that the denying of the existence of something is either an attempt at abolishing a category or simply taking place legitimately within a another species of  talk?  
If I deny the existence of witches then I am denying the existence of  certain kind of being; but I am also abolishing a whole kind of  talk, namely,  witch-talk . This later fact does not invalidate the former claim. And this claim pertains itself to  a talk regarding what kind of things exist. Indeed, should the former claim turn out to be true, the abolishing of witch-talk is quite justified.
In medieval science there was a whole kind of talk involving final causes.  Thereafter it became  quite  legitimate to question the use of this kind of language in science.  In such a debate one cannot simply appeal to the existence of a language-game in the past.
Finally, the limits of a given kind of talk or language-game are not given to us immediately. To posit these is no longer a linguistic, but a philosophical problem. 